Rules
=====

The file rules.wafl contains the rules used by the system.
Each rule is in the following format

.. code-block:: text

    Trigger condition
        action 1
        action 2
        action 3
        ...

Notice that the trigger condition has no indentation, while the actions are indented by any number spaces.
Each action returns a true or false value.
If that value is false, the rule stops executing and the next rule is triggered.
A demo of the rules can be found in the repository `wafl_home <https://github.com/fractalego/wafl_home>`_.

A rule ends when the next rule is encountered (a new trigger condition is found).
The trigger condition can be a single fact. For example

.. code-block:: text

    This bot's name is "computer"

There are two actors in the system: "the user" and "the bot".
One simple rule example can be

.. code-block:: text

    The user asks what is this bot's name
        SAY Hello, my name is Computer

The rule above will be triggered when the user asks what is this bot's name.
There are 7 types of actions:
**SAY**,
**REMEMBER**,
**asking a question**,
**generate a text**,
**triggering of another rule**,
**code execution**,
**entailment**.


SAY command
-----------

This command will make the bot say something.
For example the rule above will make the bot say "Hello, my name is computer".

REMEMBER command
----------------

This command will make the bot remember something.
for example the rule below will make the bot remember the user's name.

.. code-block:: text

    The user says their name is John
        REMEMBER The user's name is John

Asking a question
-----------------

Typing a question (with or without question mark) will return a variable.
This variable can be used later in the rule
For example the rule below will make the bot ask the user's name.

.. code-block:: text

    The user says their name
        name = what is the user's name?
        REMEMBER The user's name is {name}

Yes/No questions return a truth condition.
For example by using the rule below, the bot will ask the user if they want to remember their name.

.. code-block:: text

    The user says their name
        name = what is the user's name?
        Do you want to remember the user's name?
        REMEMBER The user's name is {name}

If the user says "no", the rule will stop executing and the REMEMBER command will never be used


Generate a text
----------------

A text can be generated in a similar fashion as when asking questions

.. code-block:: text

    The user says their name
        name = what is the user's name?
        italian_name = the italian version of {name} is
        SAY The italian version of {name} is {italian_name}

The text will be generated by the line "the italian version of {name}" according to the LLM model.
The only difference with asking question is that the text on the right hand side of `=` is a statement
and not a question.

Triggering of another rule
--------------------------

A rule can trigger another rule as follows

.. code-block:: text

    The user says their name
        name = what is the user's name?
        the name if the user is {name}

    The name of the user is John
        SAY Hello John!

In this case the second rule is triggered if the user says their name is John.

Code execution
--------------

The code execution is done by using the python syntax.
A function defined in the file `functions.py` can be called from the rule.


For example, the file `rules.wafl` contains the following rule

.. code-block:: text

    The user says their name
        name = what is the user's name?
        greet({name})


and the file `functions.py` contains the following function

.. code-block:: python

    def greet(name):
        print("Hello", name)

When the user says their name, the bot will greet the user by calling the function greet with the user's name as argument.
However print() does not activate the SAY command.
From the `functions.py` file, a rule can be triggered by using the syntax `"% ... %"`

.. code-block:: python

    def greet(name):
        "% SAY Hello %"
        f"% SAY your name is {name} %"

The first line will make the bot say "Hello". The second line will make the bot say "your name is John" if the user's name is John.

The syntax `"% ... %"`, can be used to trigger a rule, to generate a text, to ask a question, to remember something, or any other action available in the rules file.
For example the prior function can be written as follows

.. code-block:: python

    def greet(name):
        "% SAY Hello %"
        "% SAY your name is {name} %"
        date = "% what is the date today? %"
        "% SAY today is {date} %"
        while "% Do you want to continue? %":
            "% SAY I am happy to continue %"

Entailment
----------

The entailment is done by using the :- operator. if RHS entails LHS, then LSH :- RHS is true, otherwise it is false.
For example the rule below will stop at the second line if the user's name is not John.

.. code-block:: text

    The user says their name
        name = what is the user's name?
        The user's name is John :- The user's name is {name}
        SAY Your name is John!

